[Music] Good day everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger,
and we're talking about box arithmetic
and applying it to number theory,
particularly the Euler product formula for the
zeta function and associated things. For us,
the central object here is what we call the
fundamental identity of arithmetic, which is an
identity involving boxes and the caret operation.
We've shown how to take that identity and use it
to cook up variants of the Euler product. I
want to go further by talking a little more
about multiplicative functions and then applying
them to the situation. Perhaps in the next video,
we'll bring in Dirichlet series into the story.
We're touching base with some pretty fundamental
and important ideas from number theory, but
perhaps in a somewhat novel combinatorial way.
The fundamental identity of arithmetic is this
one here: here is the box of powers of two, then
powers of three, then powers of five, carrying on
over primes. We're taking the caret of all these
boxes, and on the right-hand side, we have the
box consisting of all the natural numbers. What
we saw last time is that if you take an integer n,
then you can raise everything to the nth power and
still get an identity involving boxes and their
carets. Here we've just taken all of these and
raised them to the nth power, raised all of these
to the nth power, and so on, and on the right-hand
side, raised the natural numbers to the nth
power. Then we saw that to connect with the Euler
product, we apply this sum operator which takes
one of these boxes and adds up all the elements
in the box. So the sum of all these elements, then
times the sum of all these elements, times the
sum of all these elements, etc. That should, in
some sense, be equal to the sum of all of these.
When n is a natural number like five,
it appears that none of these things
make immediate sense. But if n is a negative
number like minus five, then these sums here,
according to classical analysts, converge. They
don't actually converge to me because I'm not
allowing infinite arithmetical processes,
but nevertheless, the standard story is
that if you took n to be say minus eight,
then you would get a legitimate identity,
and that's essentially the Euler product. The
crucial thing here is the multiplicative aspect
of this taking powers operation. We want to
exploit that and investigate multiplicative
functions more generally so we can cook
up variants to this important example.
What made the previous example work is the
multiplicative property of taking a power,
that a * b to the n is equal to a to the n *
b to the n for general natural numbers a and
b. This motivates us to define the following: a
strongly multiplicative function from the natural
numbers to the natural numbers, or perhaps
from the natural numbers to the integers,
is a function that satisfies this basic property
that f of a * b equals f of a * f of b. For
example, raising a number to the nth power is an
example of a strongly multiplicative function.
Somewhat weaker than that is just the notion of
a multiplicative function. It’s the same story,
we have the same condition that f of a * b
equals f of a * f of b, but now we require
only that it works when the numbers a and
b are relatively prime natural numbers,
in other words, when they don't have any
common factors, their gcd (greatest common
divisor) is one. This is a weaker condition,
meaning there are going to be more of these
multiplicative functions than there are
strongly multiplicative functions. It will
turn out that just multiplicative functions
are enough for us to make this story work,
and it's pleasant because there are actually
quite a lot of really interesting multiplicative
functions that play an important role in
number theory, even in classical number theory.
Let’s talk about some important
multiplicative functions. One of them
is the Möbius function, which is very simple. A
natural number is sent to either one, minus one,
or zero. It’s sent to zero if it has a squared
prime factor in it, in other words, if one of
the primes in its prime decomposition appears
with an exponent greater than one. For example,
12 has 2 squared as a factor, so μ(12) will be
zero. If the number does not have any squared
prime factors, meaning all the primes that
appear in the expansion of this number into
prime factors are distinct, then μ(n) is one if
there's an even number of such prime factors,
and it's minus one if there are an odd
number of prime factors. It's not too
hard to see that this is a multiplicative
function, and it plays a big role in number
theory. It’s not actually going to be so
important for us for what we're doing today,
but it will figure importantly when we start
talking about Dirichlet series in a lecture or so.
Another one, the Euler totient function φ(n), is
the number of natural numbers k less than n which
are relatively prime to n, in other words, which
don’t have any common factor with n. For example,
φ(7) is six because all the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, and 6, all the natural numbers less than seven,
are relatively prime to seven because seven
is a prime. φ(8), on the other hand, well,
the numbers which are less than eight and
relatively prime to it are 1, 3, 5, and 7,
and there are four of them, so φ(8) equals
4. The basic rule is that if p is a prime,
then φ(p) = p - 1, and φ(p^k) = p^k * (p - 1).
You can think about this in the following way:
this is the same as p^k, which is all the numbers
from 1 to p^k minus p^(k-1), which are all the
multiples of p. All the multiples of p which are
less than or equal to p^k are p * 1, p * 2, p * 3,
etc., all the way up to p * p^(k-1), so there
are p^(k-1) of them. So, you have to take them
away, and all the others are relatively prime
to p^k. This is an example where we see it's
not strongly multiplicative because this thing
here is not the k-th power of this. So, it's not
strongly multiplicative, but it is multiplicative
in the sense that this formula here suffices to
allow you to calculate φ of any number because
you just decompose this number into prime factors
(assuming you can do that), and then you apply
these formulas to each one of those prime factor
powers. The result will just be the product of
all of those. This is the Euler totient function.
It’s going to be interesting for us now to apply
this Euler totient function φ to our fundamental
identity of arithmetic. Here is our fundamental
identity of arithmetic which you've all seen
quite a lot now. I'm just expanding the natural
numbers on the right-hand side a little bit
because it's going to be interesting to see the
values of these various things. What we're going
to do is we're going to apply φ to each element
here, every natural number that you see here,
we're going to apply φ to it. So, φ(1) is 1,
φ(2) is 1 because that’s a prime, one less
than it is 1. φ(2^2), well, that’s 2 according
to the formula, that would be 2^(2-1) * (2-1),
so that's 2. φ(2^3), according to
the formula, that’s 2^(3-1) * (2-1),
that’s 4. So, we see that we're getting powers of
two here also but sort of staggered. φ(3) is 2,
φ(3^2) is 3 * (3-1), so 3 * 2. φ(3^3) is 3^(3-1)
* (3-1), which is 9 * 2 or 18, etc. Again,
we get another kind of geometric series, starting
with two, common ratio three. The next one, φ(5),
is 4. φ(5^2) will be 5 * 4 which is 20. φ(5^3),
φ(5^3) is 5^(3-1) * 4, so that's 100, and so on.
On the right-hand side, the φ of all of these
things is this list here: φ(1) is 1, φ(2) is 1,
φ(3) is 2, φ(4) is 2, φ(5) is 4, φ(6) is 2, and
if we didn’t know that, φ(6), the numbers which
are relatively prime to six are just one and five.
Another way of getting that would be to take two
and three which are relatively prime, φ(2) is 1,
φ(3) is 2, therefore φ(6) has to be 1 * 2. φ(7) is
prime 6. φ(8) we've already talked about, that's
4. φ(9), that's the same as 3^2, we know that's
6. φ(10), that's the product of φ(2) and φ(5), so
1 * 4, so that's 4. φ(11) is a prime, so φ(11) is
10. φ(12), that's the product of φ(3) and φ(4), 3
and 4 are relatively prime, so the product here is
2 * 2, we get 4. φ(13) would be 12, and so on. Now
we're getting an identity of the carets of these
various things. The statement is, for example,
the fours that appear on the right-hand side,
namely this one, this one, this one, and this one,
are obtained by carting these boxes and seeing
where you get fours. That amounts to how can you
choose a box element here, a box element here,
a box element here, and so on, so that the
product of all of those is four. 1 * 1 * 4, or
there's an example, or 1 * 1 * 4, that's another
example, or 4 * 1 * 1, that's another example,
or 2 * 2 * 1, that's another example,
and I guess maybe that's all there is.
That's cool. We have an identity, and we could
apply the sum operation. But on the face of it,
that's not immediately interesting because
these sums appear like they're all going to
be divergent. But what we can do is go back and do
exactly the same kind of thing that we did to the
zeta function story. We could take this identity
and say apply an nth power, still the same idea,
we can apply the multiplicative function of
raising something to the nth power and we're
still going to get an identity exactly of the
same kind. But now we just have to take all
of these elements and raise them all to the nth
power, all of them, and that's going to be another
identity of msets or boxes. If we judiciously
choose n to be a negative of a natural number,
the negative of a natural number, then we can
expect, at least classically, that these guys
here, well the entries are getting big, and so if
you raise them to a negative natural number power,
you're getting something which gets smaller and
smaller, so there's a chance that this thing here
will converge in some kind of traditional sense.
The same thing will apply to each one of these
things here, we're going to get geometric series,
in fact. We can write down formulas for them and
so we're going to get some kind of identity
very much like an Euler product for the zeta
function. But now it's quite different because
instead of having the natural numbers down here,
we have the totient values of the natural
numbers. Let's see what kind of identity we get.
Now what we want to do is write down formulas for
the sums of the things that are in these boxes.
So, all of this is the first sum, and then we
multiply by this next sum, and then the next sum,
etc. We multiply them all together and we should
get this sum on the right-hand side, at least in
some sense. On the left-hand side, we have a
product over primes. What we have is we have
one. Each one of them starts with one, and then
there's a geometric series. Like this one here is
a geometric series that starts with (p-1)^n. This
is the p = 5 case, so (p-1)^n, and then there’s,
it’s just a geometric series built on that where
the common ratio is p^n, or p^n in general.
1 + p^n + p^(2n) + p^(3n), etc., the geometric
series. We’re taking the product over all primes,
that’s what's on the left-hand side of this.
On the right-hand side, we’re summing over the
natural numbers k. We’re taking φ(k), those are
these numbers 1, 1, 2, 2, 4, 2, etc., and we’re
raising them all to the nth power. As I mentioned,
maybe we have a better chance of getting something
that looks sort of familiar to us in a convergent
sense if we make n a negative integer, so maybe
we set n = -m, we make this replacement. This n
is replaced with -m, and then it ends up in the
bottom here, so we get 1 over (p-1)^m. This is a
geometric series, so its sum will be 1 / (1 - the
common ratio), which is p^n, but p^n is the
same as p^-n. In the denominator here we have
(p-1)^m * (1 - p^-m), we’re taking the product of
all of those overall primes. Over here, we just
get the sum of the φ(k)s, k running through all
the natural numbers, now raised to this m power.
This is a kind of cool formula, and if you've
been following the lecture, you think, well yeah,
we're just applying φ to this fundamental
identity, it's not a surprise. If you've
seen the derivation up till now, you say it's not
a surprise, but if I just showed you this formula,
showed you the Euler product formula for
the zeta function, and I said, oh here,
by the way, is something that's a little
bit like that, a little bit different,
you might not immediately twig
that this is actually a relatively
simple kind of consequence of essentially the
same identity that underlies the zeta function
story. It looks different, even though it has the
same general form, a product over primes and a sum
over natural numbers. Here I've rewritten the
formula so we can admire it, and we should ask,
well yeah, but is it really true? Is it in
some sense true? Can we check it somehow?
Well yes we can, because here we're taking
products and here we're taking sums, and although
these are ongoing, the idea is that if we choose
some m which is a natural number now, then we have
some kind of convergence. We are expecting that
as we carry on, we're sort of approaching some
general value, maybe we're not approaching a real
number but we can just say that as we carry both
of these computations on, we should expect that
they start looking close to each other. So we can
check that. Let's check it with m equal to 10 so
we have a reasonably big power down here so that
these things go to zero reasonably quickly so that
we have a better chance of convergence quickly.
Let's compute this thing here. This is the product
of primes p up to 20: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17,
and 19. I've taken those eight products, all of
this form 1 + 1 / (p-1)^10, 1 - p^-10. Of course,
I haven't done it, my computer has done it, and
my computer tells me that this is approximately
2.2933573 dot dot dot. On the right-hand
side, we could take the sum of 1 / φ(k)^10,
say k going from 1 to 13, the ones I showed you
already. My computer can calculate that also
and it gets 2.2933535. Hey, so that's not bad,
we've got equality up to seven decimal places,
that gives us a fair amount of confidence that
this is a reasonable formula. There's something
magical about it because on the face of it
these things are very different. Here is a
product over primes and here is a sum over natural
numbers and we're taking this funny sort of φ,
the Euler totient function, to some power. It’s
interesting. Now, has this been studied? Well,
I don't know actually, I haven't checked. My guess
is probably number theorists know this, but maybe
it's not well known. Maybe if you're a number
theorist you can tell me if this is well known
or not. In any case, I just want to suggest to
you that this is one of many possible Euler type
formulas that we could cook up without really that
much work, just by taking the fundamental identity
of arithmetic and applying some convenient, in
this case, sequence of multiplicative functions to
all the entries. That's what we did, we took the
totient function and then we raised things to a
power, so we actually performed two multiplicative
functions on the elements of the identity.
We need more multiplicative functions, so here are
some more very common and important multiplicative
functions coming from number theory. I just
remind you that multiplicative here doesn’t mean
strongly multiplicative, so it means that when you
apply one of these things to powers of a prime,
you have to have a separate formula for each
power, but that's enough for us to be able to
apply the story to our fundamental identity. The
divisor count function, where d(n) is just the
number of divisors of natural number n. For
example, 6 has 1, 2, 3, and 4 as divisors,
and the number in this set is 4. Here’s what the
function looks like for numbers 1 through 20:
d(1) is 1, d(2) is 2, d(3) is 2, d(4) is 3, etc.
You just have a look. The number of divisors of n.
Another kind of related thing is the sum of the
divisor function σ(n). This is the sum of the
divisors of n. In summation notation, σ(n) is
the summation over d dividing n of d. A crucial
property is that σ(p^k) is 1 + p + p^2 + all
the way up to p^k. That’s a geometric series,
so the formula is (p^(k+1) - 1) / (p - 1). If
you know this formula for a power of a prime,
then you can pretty easily calculate
σ(n) for n a natural number as long as
you know the prime factorization of n.
That's another multiplicative function.
There's a variant to that. Somewhat more
generally, we can also look at the sum
of the k-th powers of the divisors of n. So
σ_k(n) is the sum over all d dividing n of d^k,
the sum of powers of divisors. When k is zero,
you’re just counting them, and then that's really
this one here. When k is one, you’re taking the
ordinary sum, that's this one here. This is a
generalization of these other ones. These are
all multiplicative functions, so in principle
we can play the same game that we just played
with the totient function for any one of them.
In summary, there are lots of opportunities
for cooking up Euler type product formulas
with the general idea being that we start
with the fundamental identity of arithmetic,
namely this thing here, consisting of
boxes, one associated to each prime
number on the left and the box of all natural
numbers on the right. Then we apply various
multiplicative functions to all the elements,
and then after that, we sum up the elements
by applying the S operator which converts
these boxes into sums, potentially numbers,
and converts the carets into ordinary products. So
we have a product of sums for all of these boxes
equaling some sum over the natural numbers
of whatever it is that we're looking at.
In this story, there’s a helpful tip here which
is that the product of multiplicative functions is
also multiplicative, so that means that you could
iterate this story. We’ve already done that once,
we already applied the totient function and
then we raised things to a power to try to
get something that more easily converges.
We can do the same kind of thing here,
but we could in principle iterate this a number
of times and apply one multiplicative function
and then another and then maybe another one.
We’re going to get a whole bunch of identities,
and these identities are maybe interesting,
they’re telling us something about the world
of numbers. This is not so far from
what number theorists already do,
this kind of story is not at all far from
standard classical analytic number theory.
That becomes even more focused when we
shift to Dirichlet series. In my next talk,
I want to show you that this box arithmetic point
of view becomes particularly useful when we're
analyzing convolution of arithmetic functions,
Dirichlet convolutions, and Dirichlet series.
Hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening.
[Music]